Readme.md, before:

# Consul API Gateway on Nomad

## What is this?

An API Gateway is used for controlling access at entry and traffic management.
You can read more about it the [API gateways overview documentation](https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/docs/connect/gateways/api-gateway).

This repository contains a working example of how to deploy an API Gateway using Consul and Nomad. It has the following.
1. A Dockerfile to build an image with Consul and Envoy.
2. Certs to enable mTLS between Consul and Nomad.
3. Configs to start Consul and Nomad agents.
4. ACL files to define authorization to Consul services.
5. Nomad job files to deploy the API Gateway and an example app.

The example is on-par with production-grade deployment, with mTLS enabled for both Consul and Nomad, and ACLs/Intentions for services and agents.
We call it on-par because we have not deployed a multi-node setup, instead everything is running on a single node.

## How to get this running?

1. Navigate to the working-example directory (hashicorp-consul-gateway-on-nomad).
   `cd hashicorp-consul-gateway-on-nomad`
2. Generate certs for Nomad and Consul. Sample certs generation and usage can be found here [Consul Certs](https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/tutorials/security/tls-encryption-secure) and [Nomad Certs](https://developer.hashicorp.com/nomad/tutorials/transport-security/security-enable-tls).
   Below are the commands to generate certificates in the `certs` folder. This example uses their path to configure Consul and Nomad.
   Remember, we have a single node deployment for this example, so the Consul server and the client are the same.
   ```bash
    cd certs/consul
    consul tls ca create
    consul tls cert create -server -dc dc1 -additional-ipaddress=<ip addr of the node> -additional-dnsname=<hostname of the node>
    cd ../nomad
    nomad tls ca create
    nomad tls cert create -server -region global -additional-ipaddress=<ip addr of the node> -additional-dnsname=<hostname of the node> -additional-dnsname="client.global.nomad"
   ```
3. Optionally, update the Consul and Nomad agent `tls` configurations if you're not using certificates you generated in the `certs/` directory in step 2. The agent configuration files can be found at `consul/consul-agent-config.hcl` and `nomad/nomad-agent-config.hcl`.
4. Start Consul agent.
    - Start Consul in dev mode `consul agent -dev -ui -data-dir /tmp/consul -config-file=consul/consul-agent-config.hcl`
5. Create appropriate [ACL Tokens](https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/tutorials/security/access-control-setup-production) for services to be deployed i.e. Nomad servers, Nomad clients, Consul servers, Consul clients, Example Apps, etc.
   The corresponding policies can be found in the acl folder in this repo. Use the following commands to create the tokens and policies.
   ```
   consul acl bootstrap
   
   export CONSUL_HTTP_TOKEN=<consul_bootstrap_token>
   export CONSUL_HTTP_ADDR=https://<ip addr of the node>:8501
   export CONSUL_CACERT=<path to consul CA>
   export CONSUL_CLIENT_CERT=<path to consul server cert>
   export CONSUL_CLIENT_KEY=<path to consul server key>

   consul acl policy create -name "my-api-gateway" -rules @consul/acl/my-api-gateway-policy.hcl -description "api gateway policy"
   consul acl token create -description "Token for my-api-gateway" -policy-name "my-api-gateway"

   consul acl policy create -name "hello-app-register" -rules @consul/acl/hello-app-policy.hcl -description "Allow hello-app to register into the catalog"
   consul acl token create -description "Service token for hello-app" -policy-name "hello-app-register"

   consul acl policy create -name "nomad-agent" -description "Nomad Agent Policy" -rules @consul/acl/nomad-agent-policy.hcl
   consul acl token create -description "Nomad Agent Token" -policy-name "nomad-agent"

   consul acl policy create -name "consul-agent" -description "Consul Agent Policy" -rules @consul/acl/consul-agent-policy.hcl
   consul acl token create -description "d9acecc4-acd7-8bf7-2165-40c8c899ce7a agent token" -node-identity "<node id of the agent>:<dc>" -policy-name "consul-agent"
   
   consul acl set-agent-token agent <acl token for consul agent create in the previous line>
   ```
6. Start Nomad agent.
    - Edit the `consul` settings with Consul addresses and token in `nomad/nomad-agent-config.hcl`. Below are the values to be updated inside `consul` stanza.
    ```
    address = "<Consul ip address>:8501"
    grpc_address = "<Consul ip address>:8503"
    token = "<token created in Consul for Nomad ACL>"
    ```
    - Start Nomad server `sudo nomad agent -dev -config=nomad/nomad-agent-config.hcl`
7. Setup the environment variables for your Nomad CLI.
   ```
    export NOMAD_ADDR=https://<ip addr of the node>:4646
    export NOMAD_CACERT=<path to Nomad CA>
    export NOMAD_CLIENT_CERT=<path to Nomad client cert>
    export NOMAD_CLIENT_KEY=<path to Nomad client key>
   ```
8. Create appropriate [ACL Tokens](https://developer.hashicorp.com/nomad/tutorials/access-control/access-control-tokens)
    ```
    nomad acl bootstrap
    ```
    ```
    export NOMAD_TOKEN=<token generated in the line above>
    ```
    Note: this example generates and uses the bootstrap token for simplicity, in production you should use a token with proper policies.
    The bootstrap token is used to create the policies and tokens for the services and Nomad clients.
9. Deployment of API Gateway requires and image with both Consul and Envoy, build an image using the Dockerfile in this repo.
   ```
   cd /consul-and-envoy
   docker build -t consul-envoy:latest .
   ```
   Optionally, you can push the image to a remote registry.
   ```
   docker push consul-envoy:latest
   ```
10. Write proxy-defaults and service-defaults in Consul. (If you don't have configs defined for each service and proxy already).
    - Use files `proxy-defaults.hcl` and `service-defaults.hcl` in this repo.
    - `consul config write consul/defaults/proxy-default.hcl`
    - `consul config write consul/defaults/service-default.hcl`
11. Once we have the Consul tokens for API Gateway and hello-app from step #5. Set them up as environment variables.
    We will use these environment variables to create Nomad variables for the jobs in later steps.
    ```
    export CONSUL_API_GATEWAY_TOKEN=<token for api-gateway>
    export CONSUL_HELLO_APP_TOKEN=<token for hello-app>
    export CONSUL_CA_CERT=<path to consul CA>
    export CONSUL_CLIENT_CERT=<path to consul client cert>
    export CONSUL_CLIENT_KEY=<path to consul client key>
    ```
12. Create [Nomad variables](https://developer.hashicorp.com/nomad/tutorials/variables/variables-create) for api-gateway and the hello-app.
   ```
   nomad var put nomad/jobs/ingress/gateway/api \
    consul_cacert=@$CONSUL_CA_CERT \
    consul_client_cert=@$CONSUL_CLIENT_CERT \
    consul_client_key=@$CONSUL_CLIENT_KEY \
    consul_grpc_addr=$CONSUL_GRPC_ADDR \
    consul_http_addr=$CONSUL_HTTP_ADDR \
    consul_token=$CONSUL_API_GATEWAY_TOKEN

   nomad var put nomad/jobs/golang/apps/hello-app \
    consul_token=$CONSUL_HELLO_APP_TOKEN
   ```
13. Deploy the API Gateway.
    - Look at the api-gateway-docker.nomad.hcl file in this repo.
    - Edit the ports and Consul address appropriately.
    - Run `nomad run api-gateway-docker.nomad.hcl`. (To use a Docker image from a remote registry, run `nomad run -var="consul_envoy_image=<remote repo>/consul-envoy:latest" api-gateway-docker.nomad.hcl`)
    - Check Nomad UI, you should see the job running.
    - Check the Consul UI, you should see the API Gateway registered.
14. Add intentions to allow traffic from API Gateway to example-app.
    - Use file rest-api-intentions.hcl in this repo.
    - Run `consul config write consul/intentions/hello-app-intentions.hcl`
15. Register listener for API Gateway.
    - Use file gateway-listeners.hcl in this repo.
    - Run `consul config write consul/api-gateway-configs/gateway-listeners.hcl`
16. Register http routes for API Gateway so that Envoy knows how and where to write the traffic.
    - Use file my-http-route.hcl in this repo.
    - Run `consul config write consul/api-gateway-configs/my-http-route.hcl`.
17. Start hello-app.
    - Look at the hello-app-golang-docker.nomad.hcl file in this repo.
    - Edit the ports and Consul address appropriately.
    - Run `nomad run nomad/apps/hello-app-golang-docker.nomad.hcl`
    - Check Nomad UI, you should see the job running.
    - Check Consul UI, you should see the example-app registered.
18. Test the API Gateway.
    - Run `curl -v http://<api-gateway-address>:<api-gateway-port>/hello`
    - You should see the response from hello-app.
19. For additional debugging, you could dive into Envoy configs through envoy admin url, Nomad job logs and Consul catalog service definition.

# Additional Notes:
1. You can give a try to Nomad workload and service identities if you are not running strict mTLS between Consul and Nomad OR have a terminating gateway between them.
    - More on this [here](https://developer.hashicorp.com/nomad/tutorials/integrate-consul/consul-acl).
    - Then the jobs could run without the `consul_token` variable and the generation of the same could be skipped from the steps above.

Commit message:

minimal updates to get working end-to-end
After testing in a fresh environment, I found a number of steps that don't work,
are out of order, or have undesireable effects. This changeset represents a
minimum amount of updates just to get this all working without improving the
workflow more generally.

This includes:
* Bootstrap Consul ACLs after configuring the Consul environment variables, so
  that we can connect to the Consul agent we're trying to configure.
* Run `nomad` with the `-dev-connect` flag so that the API GW is listening on a
  non-localhost address.
* Make it clear the certs used for the Nomad CLI are the ones named "server".
* Update the Docker build step so that in the default local development case
  we're building an image that Nomad will not try to download.
* Add the missing Consul gRPC and HTTP address to the values we write to Nomad
  Variables, and make the name of the Consul CA variable consistent with
  Consul's use.
* Explain where to find the API GW address and port.
* Remove incorrect references to env vars from the Nomad agent config.
* Make the `tls.cert_file` and `tls.key_file` path match the names of the files
  we create.
* Ensure we don't commit certificates by adding them to `.gitignore`

Additional PRs will follow on this repo to resolve #2 and #3.

Readme.md, after:

# Consul API Gateway on Nomad

## What is this?

An API Gateway is used for controlling access at entry and traffic management.
You can read more about it the [API gateways overview documentation](https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/docs/connect/gateways/api-gateway).

This repository contains a working example of how to deploy an API Gateway using Consul and Nomad. It has the following.
1. A Dockerfile to build an image with Consul and Envoy.
2. Certs to enable mTLS between Consul and Nomad.
3. Configs to start Consul and Nomad agents.
4. ACL files to define authorization to Consul services.
5. Nomad job files to deploy the API Gateway and an example app.

The example is on-par with production-grade deployment, with mTLS enabled for both Consul and Nomad, and ACLs/Intentions for services and agents.
We call it on-par because we have not deployed a multi-node setup, instead everything is running on a single node.

## How to get this running?

1. Navigate to the working-example directory (hashicorp-consul-gateway-on-nomad).
   `cd hashicorp-consul-gateway-on-nomad`
2. Generate certs for Nomad and Consul. Sample certs generation and usage can be found here [Consul Certs](https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/tutorials/security/tls-encryption-secure) and [Nomad Certs](https://developer.hashicorp.com/nomad/tutorials/transport-security/security-enable-tls).
   Below are the commands to generate certificates in the `certs` folder. This example uses their path to configure Consul and Nomad.
   Remember, we have a single node deployment for this example, so the Consul server and the client are the same.
   ```bash
    cd certs/consul
    consul tls ca create
    consul tls cert create -server -dc dc1 -additional-ipaddress=<ip addr of the node> -additional-dnsname=<hostname of the node>
    cd ../nomad
    nomad tls ca create
    nomad tls cert create -server -region global -additional-ipaddress=<ip addr of the node> -additional-dnsname=<hostname of the node> -additional-dnsname="client.global.nomad"
   ```
3. Optionally, update the Consul and Nomad agent `tls` configurations if you're not using certificates you generated in the `certs/` directory in step 2. The agent configuration files can be found at `consul/consul-agent-config.hcl` and `nomad/nomad-agent-config.hcl`.
4. Start Consul agent.
    - Start Consul in dev mode `consul agent -dev -ui -data-dir /tmp/consul -config-file=consul/consul-agent-config.hcl`
5. Create appropriate [ACL Tokens](https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/tutorials/security/access-control-setup-production) for services to be deployed i.e. Nomad servers, Nomad clients, Consul servers, Consul clients, Example Apps, etc.
   The corresponding policies can be found in the acl folder in this repo. Use the following commands to create the tokens and policies.
   ```
   export CONSUL_HTTP_ADDR=https://<ip addr of the node>:8501
   export CONSUL_CACERT=<path to consul CA>
   export CONSUL_CLIENT_CERT=<path to consul server cert>
   export CONSUL_CLIENT_KEY=<path to consul server key>

   consul acl bootstrap

   export CONSUL_HTTP_TOKEN=<consul_bootstrap_token>

   consul acl policy create -name "my-api-gateway" -rules @consul/acl/my-api-gateway-policy.hcl -description "api gateway policy"
   consul acl token create -description "Token for my-api-gateway" -policy-name "my-api-gateway"

   consul acl policy create -name "hello-app-register" -rules @consul/acl/hello-app-policy.hcl -description "Allow hello-app to register into the catalog"
   consul acl token create -description "Service token for hello-app" -policy-name "hello-app-register"

   consul acl policy create -name "nomad-agent" -description "Nomad Agent Policy" -rules @consul/acl/nomad-agent-policy.hcl
   consul acl token create -description "Nomad Agent Token" -policy-name "nomad-agent"

   consul acl policy create -name "consul-agent" -description "Consul Agent Policy" -rules @consul/acl/consul-agent-policy.hcl
   consul acl token create -description "d9acecc4-acd7-8bf7-2165-40c8c899ce7a agent token" -node-identity "<node id of the agent>:<dc>" -policy-name "consul-agent"

   consul acl set-agent-token agent <acl token for consul agent create in the previous line>
   ```
6. Start Nomad agent.
    - Edit the `consul` settings with Consul addresses and token in `nomad/nomad-agent-config.hcl`. Below are the values to be updated inside `consul` stanza.
    ```
    address = "<Consul ip address>:8501"
    grpc_address = "<Consul ip address>:8503"
    token = "<token created in Consul for Nomad ACL>"
    ```
    - Start Nomad server `sudo nomad agent -dev -dev-connect -config=nomad/nomad-agent-config.hcl`
7. Setup the environment variables for your Nomad CLI.
   ```
    export NOMAD_ADDR=https://<ip addr of the node>:4646
    export NOMAD_CACERT=<path to Nomad CA>
    export NOMAD_CLIENT_CERT=<path to Nomad server cert>
    export NOMAD_CLIENT_KEY=<path to Nomad server key>
   ```
8. Create appropriate [ACL Tokens](https://developer.hashicorp.com/nomad/tutorials/access-control/access-control-tokens)
    ```
    nomad acl bootstrap
    ```
    ```
    export NOMAD_TOKEN=<token generated in the line above>
    ```
    Note: this example generates and uses the bootstrap token for simplicity, in production you should use a token with proper policies.
    The bootstrap token is used to create the policies and tokens for the services and Nomad clients.
9. Deployment of API Gateway requires and image with both Consul and Envoy, build an image using the Dockerfile in this repo. If you are not going to push the image to a remote registry, be sure not to tag it as `"latest"` so that Nomad does not try to download it from a remote registry.
   ```
   cd ./consul-and-envoy
   docker build -t consul-envoy:local .
   ```
   Optionally, you can build the image and push it to a remote registry.
   ```
   docker build -t example/consul-envoy:latest .
   docker push example/consul-envoy:latest
   ```
10. Write proxy-defaults and service-defaults in Consul. (If you don't have configs defined for each service and proxy already).
    - Use files `proxy-defaults.hcl` and `service-defaults.hcl` in this repo.
    - `consul config write consul/defaults/proxy-default.hcl`
    - `consul config write consul/defaults/service-default.hcl`
11. Once we have the Consul tokens for API Gateway and hello-app from step #5. Set them up as environment variables.
    We will use these environment variables to create Nomad variables for the jobs in later steps. When setting the variable for the gRPC address, be sure to use the TLS port.
    ```
    export CONSUL_API_GATEWAY_TOKEN=<token for api-gateway>
    export CONSUL_HELLO_APP_TOKEN=<token for hello-app>
    export CONSUL_CACERT=<path to consul CA>
    export CONSUL_CLIENT_CERT=<path to consul client cert>
    export CONSUL_CLIENT_KEY=<path to consul client key>
    export CONSUL_GRPC_ADDR=<private Consul IP address>:8503
    export CONSUL_HTTP_ADDR=https://<private Consul IP address>:8501
    ```
12. Create [Nomad variables](https://developer.hashicorp.com/nomad/tutorials/variables/variables-create) for api-gateway and the hello-app.
   ```
   nomad var put nomad/jobs/ingress/gateway/api \
    consul_cacert=@$CONSUL_CACERT \
    consul_client_cert=@$CONSUL_CLIENT_CERT \
    consul_client_key=@$CONSUL_CLIENT_KEY \
    consul_grpc_addr=$CONSUL_GRPC_ADDR \
    consul_http_addr=$CONSUL_HTTP_ADDR \
    consul_token=$CONSUL_API_GATEWAY_TOKEN

   nomad var put nomad/jobs/golang/apps/hello-app \
    consul_token=$CONSUL_HELLO_APP_TOKEN
   ```
13. Deploy the API Gateway.
    - Look at the api-gateway-docker.nomad.hcl file in this repo.
    - Edit the ports and Consul address appropriately.
    - Run `nomad run api-gateway-docker.nomad.hcl`. (To use a Docker image from a remote registry, run `nomad run -var="consul_envoy_image=<remote repo>/consul-envoy:latest" api-gateway-docker.nomad.hcl`)
    - Check Nomad UI, you should see the job running.
    - Check the Consul UI, you should see the API Gateway registered.
14. Add intentions to allow traffic from API Gateway to example-app.
    - Use file rest-api-intentions.hcl in this repo.
    - Run `consul config write consul/intentions/hello-app-intentions.hcl`
15. Register listener for API Gateway.
    - Use file gateway-listeners.hcl in this repo.
    - Run `consul config write consul/api-gateway-configs/gateway-listeners.hcl`
16. Register http routes for API Gateway so that Envoy knows how and where to write the traffic.
    - Use file my-http-route.hcl in this repo.
    - Run `consul config write consul/api-gateway-configs/my-http-route.hcl`.
17. Start hello-app.
    - Look at the hello-app-golang-docker.nomad.hcl file in this repo.
    - Edit the ports and Consul address appropriately.
    - Run `nomad run nomad/apps/hello-app-golang-docker.nomad.hcl`
    - Check Nomad UI, you should see the job running.
    - Check Consul UI, you should see the example-app registered.
18. Test the API Gateway.
    - Run `nomad job status ingress` to find the allocation for the API gateway.
    - Run `nomad alloc status` to find the address for that allocation.
    - Run `curl -v http://<api-gateway-address>:<api-gateway-port>/hello`
    - You should see the response from hello-app.
19. For additional debugging, you could dive into Envoy configs through envoy admin url, Nomad job logs and Consul catalog service definition.

# Additional Notes:
1. You can give a try to Nomad workload and service identities if you are not running strict mTLS between Consul and Nomad OR have a terminating gateway between them.
    - More on this [here](https://developer.hashicorp.com/nomad/tutorials/integrate-consul/consul-acl).
    - Then the jobs could run without the `consul_token` variable and the generation of the same could be skipped from the steps above.
